---
title: "CNVeil enables accurate and robust tumor subclone identification and copy number estimation from single-cell DNA sequencing data."
collection: Conference
permalink: /publication/recombseq2024-2
excerpt: 'To address these challenges, we introduce CNVeil, a robust quantitative algorithm designed to accurately reveal CNV profiles while overcoming the inherent noise and bias in scDNA-seq data. CNVeil incorporates a unique bias correction method using normal cell profiles identified by a PCA-based Gini coefficient, effectively mitigating sequencing bias.'
date: 2024-03-15
venue: 'RECOMB-SEQ'
paperurl: 'https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.02.21.581409.abstract'
citation: 'Yuan, W., Luo, C., Hu, Y., Zhang, L., Wen, Z., Liu, Y. H., ... & Zhou, X. M. (2024). CNVeil enables accurate and robust tumor subclone identification and copy number estimation from single-cell DNA sequencing data. bioRxiv, 2024-02.'
---
Abstract: Single-cell DNA sequencing (scDNA-seq) has significantly advanced cancer research by enabling precise detection of chromosomal aberrations, such as copy number variations (CNVs), at a single-cell level. These variations are crucial for understanding tumor progression and heterogeneity among tumor subclones. However, accurate CNV inference in scDNA-seq has been constrained by several factors, including low coverage, sequencing errors, and data variability. To address these challenges, we introduce CNVeil, a robust quantitative algorithm designed to accurately reveal CNV profiles while overcoming the inherent noise and bias in scDNA-seq data. CNVeil incorporates a unique bias correction method using normal cell profiles identified by a PCA-based Gini coefficient, effectively mitigating sequencing bias. Subsequently, a multi-level hierarchical clustering, based on selected highly variable bins, is employed to initially identify coarse subclones for robust ploidy estimation and further identify fine subclones for segmentation. To infer the CNV segmentation landscape, a novel change rate-based across-cell breakpoint identification approach is specifically designed to diminish the effects of low coverage and data variability on a per-cell basis. Finally, a consensus segmentation is utilized to further standardize read depth for the inference of the final CNV profile. In comprehensive benchmarking experiments, where we compared CNVeil with seven state-of-the-art CNV detection tools, CNVeil exhibited exceptional performance across a diverse set of simulated and real scDNA-seq data in cancer genomics. CNVeil excelled in subclone identification, segmentation, and CNV profiling. In light of these results, we anticipate that CNVeil will significantly contribute to single-cell CNV analysis, offering enhanced insights into chromosomal aberrations and genomic complexity.

Yuan, W., Luo, C., Hu, Y., Zhang, L., Wen, Z., Liu, Y. H., ... & Zhou, X. M. (2024). CNVeil enables accurate and robust tumor subclone identification and copy number estimation from single-cell DNA sequencing data. bioRxiv, 2024-02.